Qus – 1 What is UNICS (UNIX)?
UNIX is a multiuser, multitasking operating system designed to provide a powerful and secure environment for managing hardware resources and running applications.
It is developed in the 1970s at Bell Labs.
UNICS  - Uniplexed Information and Computing Service.


Qus – 2 What is LINUX?
Linux is an open-source, Unix-like operating system kernel that acts as an interface between computer hardware and software.  
Linux is an open-source kernel; when combined with GNU utilities, it forms a complete operating system known as GNU/Linux.
GNU is a free software project that provides tools and utilities used with the Linux kernel to create a complete operating system.
Linux + GNU = Linux based OS
It is known for security and flexibility.
Created by Linus Torvald in 1991.
Inspired by UNIX & MINIX Operating Systems.
Linux = Linus + Unix. 


Qus – 3 What are some differences between LINUX and UNIX?
Linux is open source which means source code is publicly available and can be modified and distributed but UNIX is licensed or propertied.
Linux is inspired by UNIX and is designed to be UNIX-like. It follows many of the same principles and standards, making it compatible with UNIX software and commands.


Qus – 4 What is LINUX Distributions (Distros, Flavors)?
UNIX - UNIX refers to operating systems derived from the original UNIX or certified as UNIX-compliant.
1.	AIX – IBM’s UNIX for enterprise servers
2.	HP-UX – Hewlett-Packard UNIX
3.	Solaris – Oracle UNIX system
4.	FreeBSD – Open-source UNIX-like OS (not certified UNIX but very close)
5.	MacOS - UNIX-based (derived from BSD UNIX)
LINUX - Linux distributions are operating systems built on the Linux kernel.
1.	Ubuntu  - Desktop
2.	Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) / CentOS  - Server
3.	Kali Linux - Security
4.	Fedora  - Development
5.	Debian - Stability
6.	Android
Android is based on the Linux kernel, but it is not a traditional Linux distribution because it does not use GNU utilities and has a completely different user space.

Linux distro = Linux kernel + GNU tools + package manager
Android = Linux kernel + Android runtime + Java/Kotlin apps


Qus – 5 What are some features of Linux?
1.	Open Source
2.	Multiuser – Multiple User can access system resources simultaneously.
3.	Multitasking – Can run multiple tasks simultaneously.
4.	Security – Strong Security features and regular updates.
5.	Portability – Can be run on various hardware platforms.

Qus – 6 What is centOS?
CentOS (Community Enterprise Operating System) is a Linux distribution built from the same source code as Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL). It provides an enterprise-grade, stable, and secure operating system for free, which is why it became very popular in servers and data centers.      
RHEL → CentOS → CentOS Stream → Rocky Linux/AlmaLinux


Qus – 7 What is virtualization?
Virtualization is a process that allows multiple virtual computers to run on one physical computer using a software layer called a hypervisor.
Hypervisor: Software that creates and manages virtual machines
Examples: VMware, Virtual Box, KVM, Hyper-V
Real-world needs and uses
1. Server consolidation (Cost saving)
	Companies earlier needed: 10 physical servers for 10 applications
	With virtualization:1 powerful server can run 10 virtual machines
	Saves hardware cost, electricity, and maintenance
2. Testing and development environments
	Developers and system administrators: Test software on multiple operating 	systems (Linux, Windows, etc.)
	Create temporary test environments without buying new hardware
3. Cloud computing foundation
	Cloud providers like AWS, Azure, and GCP run: Thousands of virtual machines 	on large physical servers
	Users rent virtual servers instead of buying physical machines.
4. Disaster recovery and backup
	Virtual machines can: Be copied, backed up, and restored quickly
	Moved to another physical server if hardware fails
Types of Hypervisors 
1. Type-1 (Bare-metal):
Runs directly on hardware. Used in servers and cloud.
Examples: VMware ESXi, Microsoft Hyper-V, KVM
2. Type-2 (Hosted):
Runs on top of an operating system. Used for testing and learning.
Examples: Oracle VM VirtualBox, VMware Workstation


Qus – 8 Explain some terminology of OS?
Shell 
Shell is a program that acts as a bridge between user and the operating system.
A shell is a program that lets users interact with the OS using commands.
👉 You talk to the computer
👉 Shell understands your commands
👉 Shell tells the OS (kernel) what to do
Think of it like a translator.
A shell provides a command-line interface (CLI), whereas GUI is implemented by separate graphical components, not by the shell.
Shell is the outermost layer of the Operating System and handles user interaction.
Zsh(Z shell), Bash(Bourne again shell), sh(Bourne shell), CMD(Command Prompt), and PowerShell are command-line shells used to interact with the operating system.
Firmware
Firmware is software that is permanently (or semi-permanently) stored in hardware and controls how that hardware works.
Firmware provide basic control and functionality to hardware.
Example – BIOS, Router firmware, Printer firmware, Washing machine controller.
Drivers
A driver is a program inside the kernel that allows the OS to communicate with  hardware.
Kernel
Heart of an Operating System and Very first part of OS to load on start-up.
A kernel is the core part of an operating system. It acts as a bridge between software applications and the hardware of a computer.
The kernel manages system resources, such as the CPU, memory and devices, ensuring everything works together smoothly and efficiently.
System Calls
User programs cannot directly access hardware or critical OS resources because it would make the system unstable and insecure. To maintain safety, the operating system provides system calls — controlled interfaces that allow user programs to request services from the kernel. These calls act as a gateway between user mode and kernel mode. 
System call is a request made by the user program to the operating system, in order to get any kind of service.
printf (“hello world”) internally calls write() system call, in order to communicate with monitor.


Qus – 9 What are different ways to access Linux server remotely?
1.	Using MobaXterm
MobaXterm is a Windows tool that provides a Linux-like terminal and remote access (SSH, RDP, SFTP).
It lets you connect to servers and transfer files easily through a graphical interface.

2.	Using PuTTY Terminal
PuTTY is a free terminal emulator and SSH client used mainly on Windows to remotely connect to other computers (especially Linux/Unix servers).
PuTTY connection setup is GUI but Terminal opened after login is CLI.
3.	Using Window CMD
SSH (Secure Shell) is a network protocol used to remotely log in to another system and execute commands over an encrypted connection. default port is 22.
ssh username@ip


Qus – 10 Explain all about SSH?
SSH or Secure Shell is a network communication protocol used to access and manage systems remotely over an encrypted connection.
Example of SSH    
•	Access Linux server using Putty
•	Access a Linux server from another server
Why it is called as secure shell?
Because communication between host and client will be in encrypted format.
More about SSH
•	The default port for SSH client connections is 22
•	We can change the default port and use one between 1024 and 32,767
•	SSH is also a command in Linux
•	It is used to access an another Linux server or accessing a Linux server from a terminal.
•	Syntax: ssh username@host(IP/Domain_name)
How to use SSH?
To use SSH, ssh service must be installed on Linux server
You can check using
rpm -qa | grep ssh, or
check the file    /etc/ssh/sshd_config
If not already installed then install below two
install openssh-clients openssh-server
And now enable the ssh or check if it is enabled using
systemctl status sshd


Qus – 11 How to access remote server without password?
There are two ways to access the remote server
1.	Using password
2.	Without password (by passing the SSH key)
If you frequently access the server then its good idea to configure your ssh keys so that you can login without password
Follow the steps below
1.	Generate A New SSH Key Pair on Local Machine.
2.	Copy Public Key to Remote Machine.
3.	Login to Remote Server without password

It is a 3 step process - 
Step1: Generate an SSH key using
	ssh-keygen
You can check the generated keys using
Is -l .ssh
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub

Step2: Copy your public SSH key to remote server, (on remote server it is copied under ~/.ssh/authorizedkeys file)
ssh-copy-id username@ip


Qus – 12 What is WinSCP?
WinSCP is a free and open-source file transfer software for Windows.
It is mainly used to transfer files between your local Windows computer and a remote Linux/Unix server securely.
WinSCP supports protocols like SFTP, SCP, FTP
You can use WinSCP to:
•	Upload files from Windows → Linux
•	Download files from Linux → Windows
•	Edit server files directly.
•	Manage files using a graphical interface (like File Explorer)


Qus – 13 How to transfer file remotely between Linux servers ?
SCP (Secure Copy Protocol) is a command-line tool used for securely transferring files between a local and a remote host, or between two remote hosts, using SSH for encryption and authentication.

Syntax:
scp [options] source destination

Copy file from local → remote
scp file.txt user@remote_ip:/home/user

Copy file from remote → local
scp user@remote_ip:/home/user/file.txt .

Copy directory (recursive)
scp -r folder/ user@remote_ip:/path/	